doc: init section on file perms (#4)
Reed-CSTAR/guides: src/bash/file-perms.md

# File Permissions

We'll take another look at the output of `ls -l`:

```shell
$ ls -l
drwxr-xr-x. 1 user group 451M Jul 22  2024  Documents
-rw-r--r--. 1 user group    0 Jan 24 12:13  essay.txt
-rw-r--r--. 1 user group   45 Jan 28 19:00  cstar-guide.html
-rw-r--r--. 1 user group 100M Jul 22  2024  shoelaces.pdf
```

When you run this, you likely won't see `user` or `group`. Instead, you'll
likely see your computer username in that first column and something like it in
the next. These are the names of a **user** and of a **group,** respectively. In
all likelihood, these are the names of *your* user and *your* group.

The systems we're using --- Linux, MacOS, or WSL on Windows --- all descend from

> an operating system called UNIX, which achieved success in part due to its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an operating system called [UNIX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix), which achieved success in part due to its
```

Reviewer: (better link here? history seems more useful though)

Author: this seems fine? i don't know of any better/canonical sources for a brief high-level overview, anyway.

execute the file. Then, a different set of permissions (one, none, or all of
reading, writing, and executing) apply to a user who is not the owner but is in
the owning group. Then, there's a third set of permissions for everyone else.

This is actually what you see in the leftmost column of the long listing. The
first letter (above, this is either `-` or `d`) indicates the kind of file this
is. `-` indicates that it's just a normal file, and `d` indicates it's a
directory. Then, there are three characters describing what the owning user can
do. The first of these three indicates whether or not the
owner can read the file (`r` if they can, `-` if they can't), the second (`r` or
`-`) indicates whether they can write to the file, and the third (`x` or `-`)
indicates whether or not they can execute this file. We have another group of
the same three that describe permissions for members of the owning group, and a
final group of three that describe permissions for everyone else.

If this feels a bit abstract, we can actually see these permissions working with
a few commands. You can create a file with the `touch` command:

```shell
$ touch perm-example.txt
```

> > This command has no output. One of the recurring themes in older interfaces
> > like this is that if they don't complain, you're probably safe to assume that
> > nothing's gone wrong.

Reviewer: Older interfaces -> CLIs.

```suggestion
> This command has no output. One of the recurring themes in
> CLIs is that if they don't complain, you're probably safe to assume that
> nothing's gone wrong.
```

(Mention exit codes here?)

Author: i feel that exit codes would be somewhat unnatural to bring up for the first time here, especially in this aside. maybe it would fit better in navigation? the scripting section will also mention "hey variables exist, by the way that's what $? is"

Now, look at how `perm-example.txt` has been created:

```shell
$ ls -l perm-example.txt
-rw-r--r--. 1 atalii users 0 Feb  6 08:29 perm-example.txt
```

> We can see that in this case, the owning user is `atalii`, and the owning group
> is `users`. `atalii` has the `rw-` perms associated: They can read, write, and
> execute the file. Anyone in the users group can read the file but do nothing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can see that in this case, the owning user is `atalii`, and the owning group
is `users`. `atalii` has the `rw-` perms associated: They can read and write
the file. Anyone in the users group can read the file but do nothing
```

Reviewer: (if you mean to introduce the concept of execution here, there's probably a more correct wording here)

Reviewer: note that all other comments here are nitpicks: this is the one that motivated me to request changes here.

Author: oh heck thx

else, as indicated by `r--`. And, with the same `r--` repeated, anyone outside
the owning group can only read the file.

> Let's take a closer look at what exactly this all means. Reading a file isn't
> too strange a concept. It just means you're allowed to look at the contents,
> which, in this case, are empty:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's take a closer look at what exactly this all means. To be able to
read a file means you're allowed to look at the contents, which,
in this case, are empty:
```

```shell
$ cat perm-example.txt
```

> Writing is similarly simple. To be able to write to a file means you're able to

Reviewer: avoid 'just' or 'simple'

```suggestion
To be able to write to a file means you're able to
```

```shell
$ cat perm-example.txt
I can write to this file!
```

Execution may, unfortunately, be a bit more mistifying. We'll explore what it
means for a file to be executable in more detail when we talk about compiling
code or, in this chapter, [writing scripts](./scripting.html). For now, it's
enough to say that lots of the commands we've been using (`cat`, `ls`, `touch`,
and so forth) are actually files on disk just like everything else. Because we
can run them as commands, then, we know they're executable.

There's one last meaning to "executability" that should concern you, and that's
executability for directories. If you'll recall the example at the beginning, my
documents folder can be read, written, and executed by me, while it can only be
written and executed by anyone else. Here, execution does not actually mean
execution. Instead, it means that a user with executable permissions on the
directory can `cd` into it.

This permission system would only be so useful if you couldn't change
permissions. Fortunately, you can use the `chmod` command to change permissions.
While there's some more advanced usages we won't cover here, the basics are

> decently simple. Just for fun, try the following.

Reviewer: Mention that the `chmod` command will be explained in a bit.
